.TH tiledb_array_schema_show 1 "10 October 2015" "Version 0.1" "TileDB programs"
 
.SH NAME
tiledb_array_schema_show - prints the schema of an array to standard output

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tiledb_array_schema_show 
.BI "-A " "array_name "
[
.BI "-w " "workspace "
] [
.BI "-g " "group "
]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B tiledb_array_schema_show
prints the schema of an array in the standard output. This includes the array
name, the attribute names, the dimension names, etc. The input array must 
already be defined. On error, it returns \fB-1\fR. Moreover, if it is compiled 
in \fBVERBOSE\fR mode, it prints comprehensive error messages on \fIstderr\fR. 
On success, it returns \fB0\fR. 

The following conventions apply to the \fBSYNOPSIS\fR section:

.TS
tab (@);
c lx .
\fBbold text\fR @ type exactly as shown
\fIitalic text\fR @ replace with appropriate argument
[\fB\-a \fIarg\fR]@ any or all options within [ ] are optional
.TE
 
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI "-A" " array_name" "\fR, " \fB --array-name=\fIarray_name\fR  
The name of the array whose schema will be printed. The array must already be 
defined.

.TP
.BI "-w" " workspace" "\fR, " \fB --workspace=\fIworkspace\fR  
The path to the workspace folder where the array is stored. If it is not 
provided, the current working directory is set as the workspace by default.

.TP
.BI "-g" " group" "\fR, " \fB --group=\fIgroup\fR  
This is a directory inside the workspace where the array is stored.
Note that any group path provided is converted into an absolute path 
\fBrelative to the workspace directory\fR, i.e., regarding all home ("\\~/"), 
current ("./") and root ("/") as the workspace directory. If the group is not 
provided, the workspace is set as the default group.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
\fBtiledb_array_schema_show\fR \\ 
    \fB-w \fRmy_workspace/ \\
    \fB-g \fRmy_group/ \\
    \fB-A \fRmy_array 

Prints the schema of array \fImy_array\fR, whose data are stored in directory
\fI./my_workspace/my_group/my_array\fR.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP 
\fB0\fR for success and \fB-1\fR for error.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR tiledb_array_define (1)

.SH AUTHOR
Stavros Papadopoulos <http://people.csail.mit.edu/stavrosp>, Copyright (c) 2015
