.TH tiledb_generate_data 1 "28 June 2015" "Version 0.1" "TileDB programs"
 
.SH NAME
tiledb_generate_data - generates synthetic data for a particular array schema
in a \fBCSV\fR or \fBbinary\fR form

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tiledb_generate_data 
.BI "-w " "directory " "-A " "array_name " "-f " "filename " \
"-t " "filetype " "-n " "cell_num " 
[
.BI "-s " "seed "
]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B tiledb_generate_data
generates sythetic data for a particular array schema
in a \fBCSV\fR or \fBbinary\fR form. On error, it prints a message on stderr and
returns an error code (see \fBEXIT STATUS\fR). 

The following conventions apply to the \fBSYNOPSIS\fR section:

.TS
tab (@);
c lx .
\fBbold text\fR @ type exactly as shown
\fIitalic text\fR @ replace with appropriate argument
[\fB\-a \fIarg\fR]@ any or all options within [ ] are optional
.TE

The dataset essentially consists of a collection of cells, whose format 
complies with the schema of an array given as argument to option \fB\-A\fR.
This means that the given array must already be defined. The number of cells to
be generated, as well as the seed to the random generator, are given as 
arguments to the program as well.

.TP
.B Data distribution
.I Cooridinates:
The coordinate values are drawn uniformly at random from their 
corresponding dimension domains defined in the array schema.

.I Attribute values:
The attribute values depend on their type. The real data values (i.e.,
\fBfloat\fR and \fBdouble\fR) are drawn uniformly at random from 
\fB[0.0,1.0]\fR. The \fBint\fR and \fBint64_t\fR data values are drawn uniformly
 at random from \fB[0,max()]\fR, where \fBmax()\fR is the maximum value of the
corresponding type supported by the system that calls the function. 
Finally, the \fBchar\fR values are drawn uniformly at random from ASCII
domain \fB[45,126]\fR, i.e., all the characters between and including \fB'-'\fR 
and \fB'~'\fR.

.TP
.B CSV file format
This is described in detail in \fBtiledb_load_csv(1)\fR. The difference is
that the generated data do not contain null values and deletions.

.TP
.B Binary file format
This is described in detail in \fBtiledb_load_bin(1)\fR. The difference is
that the generated data do not contain null values and deletions.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI "-w" " directory" "\fR, " \fB --workspace=\fIdirectory\fR  
The path to the workspace folder where the TileDB array is stored. The path
must exist, and the caller must have read and write permissions on it.

.TP
.BI "-A" " array_name" "\fR, " \fB --array-name=\fIarray_name\fR  
The name of the array for which the data are generated exported. The array
must be already defined. 

.TP
.BI "-f" " filename" "\fR, " \fB --filename=\fIfilename\fR  
The name of the output file that will store the generated data. 

.TP
.BI "-t" " filetype" "\fR, " \fB --filetype=\fIfiletype\fR  
The type of the generated file. It can be either \fBcsv\fR (CSV file) or
\fBbin\fR (binary file). 

.TP
.BI "-n" " cell_num" "\fR, " \fB --cell-num=\fIcell_num\fR  
The number of cells to be generated. 

.TP
.BI "-s" " seed" "\fR, " \fB --seed=\fIseed\fR  
The seed that will be used internally for the random generator. This is
optional. If it is omitted, the default is the current time of day. 

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
\fBtiledb_generate_data\fR \\ 
    \fB-w \fRmy_workspace/ \\
    \fB-A \fRmy_array \\
    \fB-f \fRmy_array.csv \\
    \fB-t \fRcsv \\
    \fB-n \fR10000 \\
    \fB-s \fR 0

Creates CSV data for array \fImy_array\fR. The data consist of 10000 cells. A fixed 
seed \fB0\fR was used, e.g., for repeatability purposes.

\fBtiledb_generate_data\fR \\ 
    \fB-w \fRmy_workspace/ \\
    \fB-A \fRmy_array \\
    \fB-f \fRmy_array.bin \\
    \fB-t \fRbin \\
    \fB-n \fR10000

Creates binary data for array \fImy_array\fR. The data consist of 10000 cells. The 
default current time of day is used as a seed (which means that a different
dataset will be generated next time the program is executed with the same
options).

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP 
.B 0
Successful execution
.TP 
.B -1
Parser error
.TP 
.B -2
Undefined array
.TP 
.B -3
File operation failed
.TP 
.B -7
TileDB initialization failed
.TP 
.B -8
TileDB finalization failed
.TP 
.B -14
Failed to open array
.TP 
.B -15
Failed to close array

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR "tiledb_define_array" "(1) " "tiledb_load_csv" "(1) " \
"tiledb_load_bin" "(1) "

.SH AUTHOR
Stavros Papadopoulos <http://people.csail.mit.edu/stavrosp>, Copyright (c) 2015
