Working with S3
===============

This is a simple guide that demonstrates how to use TileDB on S3-compatible
backends. We will first explain how to set up an AWS account and configure
TileDB for `AWS S3 <https://aws.amazon.com/s3/>`_, and then show how to 
set up and use `minio <https://minio.io>`_ locally.

AWS
---

First, we need to set up an AWS account and generate access keys.

1. Create a new `AWS account <https://portal.aws.amazon.com/billing/signup#/start>`_.

2. Visit the `AWS console <https://aws.amazon.com/console/>`_ and sign in.

3. On the AWS console, click on the ``Services`` drop-down menu and select ``Storage->S3``. You can create S3 buckets there.

4. On the AWS console, click on the ``Services`` drop-down menu and select ``Security, Identity & Compliance->IAM``.

5. Click on ``Users`` from the left-hand side menu, and then click on the ``Add User`` button. Provide the email or username of the user you wish to add, select the ``Programmatic Access`` checkbox and click on ``Next: Permissions``.

6. Click on the ``Attach existing policies directly`` button, search for the S3-related policies and add the policy of your choice (e.g., full-access, read-only, etc.). Click on ``Next`` and then ``Create User``.

7. Upon successful creation, the next page will show the user along with two keys: ``Access key ID`` and ``Secret access key``. Write down both these keys.

8. Export these keys to your environment from a console.

.. tabs::

   .. group-tab:: Linux

      | export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=<your-access-key-id>
      | export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=<your-secret-access-key>

   .. group-tab:: Mac OSX

      | export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=<your-access-key-id>
      | export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=<your-secret-access-key>

   .. group-tab:: Windows

      | # Powershell
      | $env:AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID = "<your-access-key-id>"
      | $env:AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY = "<your-secret-access-key>"
      |
      | # cmd.exe
      | set AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=<your-access-key-id>
      | set AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=<your-secret-access-key>

Now you are ready to start writing TileDB programs! When creating a TileDB
context or a VFS object, you need to set up a configuration object with the
following parameters for AWS S3 (supposing that your S3 buckets are on region
``us-east-1`` - you can use set an arbitrary region):

.. tabs::

   .. code-tab:: c

         tiledb_config_t *config = NULL;
         tiledb_config_t *error = NULL;
         tiledb_config_create(&config, &error);

         tiledb_config_set(config, "vfs.s3.scheme", "https", &error);
         tiledb_config_set(config, "vfs.s3.region", "us-east-1", &error);
         tiledb_config_set(config, "vfs.s3.endpoint_override", "", &error);
         tiledb_config_set(config, "vfs.s3.use_virtual_addressing", "true", &error);


   .. code-tab:: c++

         tiledb::Config config;

         config["vfs.s3.scheme"] = "https";
         config["vfs.s3.region"] = "us-east-1";
         config["vfs.s3.endpoint_override"] = "";
         config["vfs.s3.use_virtual_addressing"] = true;

   .. code-tab:: py

         config = tiledb.Config()

         config["vfs.s3.scheme"] = "https";
         config["vfs.s3.region"] = "us-east-1";
         config["vfs.s3.endpoint_override"] = "";
         config["vfs.s3.use_virtual_addressing"] = "true";

.. note::
    The above configuration parameters are currently set as shown in TileDB **by default**.
    However, we suggest to always check whether the default values are the desired ones
    for your application.

minio
-----

`minio <https://minio.io>`_ is a lightweight S3-compliant object-store.
Although it has many nice features, here we focus only on local deployment,
which is very useful if you wish to quickly test your TileDB-S3 programs
locally. See the `minio quickstart guide <https://docs.minio.io/docs/minio-quickstart-guide>`_
for installation instructions.

Once you get minio server running, you need to set the S3 configurations
as follows (below, ``<port>`` stands for the port on which you are running the minio server):

.. tabs::

   .. code-tab:: c

         tiledb_config_t *config = NULL;
         tiledb_config_t *error = NULL;
         tiledb_config_create(&config, &error);

         tiledb_config_set(config, "vfs.s3.scheme", "http", &error);
         tiledb_config_set(config, "vfs.s3.endpoint_override", "localhost:<port>", &error);
         tiledb_config_set(config, "vfs.s3.use_virtual_addressing", "false", &error);


   .. code-tab:: c++

         tiledb::Config config;

         config["vfs.s3.scheme"] = "http";
         config["vfs.s3.endpoint_override"] = "localhost:<port>";
         config["vfs.s3.use_virtual_addressing"] = false;

   .. code-tab:: py

         config = tiledb.Config()

         config["vfs.s3.scheme"] = "http";
         config["vfs.s3.endpoint_override"] = "localhost:<port>";
         config["vfs.s3.use_virtual_addressing"] = "false";

